# Arrays

Read this introduction to the contiguous data structure type, which arrays are an example of. "Contiguous" refers to the memory occupied by the data structure being grouped serially by address. For instance, if an integer occupies four bytes, those four bytes are guaranteed to begin at the memory address of the first byte and end at the memory address of the fourth byte, so that those four bytes occupy memory addresses M, M+1, M+2, and M+3. One only has to reference address M to get the entire value of the integer. The same is true of contiguous arrays of any dimension. The cells of the array are guaranteed to occupy serially-grouped (contiguous) memory. Otherwise, the array can not be allocated.

**Array Operations**

`make-array(integer n): Array`

Create an array of elements 
indexed from 0 to n-1, inclusive. The number of elements in the array, 
also known as the size of the array, is n.

`get-value-at(Array a, integer index): Element`

Returns the value of the element at the given *index*. The value of *index* must be in bounds: *0 <= index <= (n - 1)*. This operation is also known as **subscripting**.

`set-value-at(Array a, integer index, Element new-value)`

Sets the element of the array at the given *index* to be equal to *new-value*.

### Bounds check

The third aspect of an array index is the check for valid ranges and 
what happens when an invalid index is accessed. This is a very important
 point since the majority of computer worms and computer viruses attack 
by using invalid array bounds.

### Declaring Array Types

The declaration of array type depends on how many features the array in a particular language has.

The easiest declaration is when 
the language has a fixed lower bound and fixed index type. If you need 
an array to store the monthly income you could declare in C

`typedef double Income[12];`

This gives you an array with in the range of 0 to 11. For a full description of arrays in C see C Programming/Arrays.

Array Decleration Examples

```cpp
int a[5] = {1,2,3}; // declares int[5] initialized to 1,2,3,0,0
char str[] = "abc"; // declares char[4] initialized to 'a','b','c','\0'
```
