# Standard Template Library

###### CS201: Elementary Data Structures
###### Unit 1: Abstract Data Types and Arrays in C++

This lecture introduces the [C++ Standard Template Library (STL) from 21:08 to 29:25](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7pMi7-wro8). STL is a formal part of the C++ language, and is a set of class templates for many important and commonly-used program components. It is very much worth your while to be familiar and practiced with this library.

## C++ Standart Template Library (STL)

- Containers
	- Iterators
		- Algorithms

```plaintext
{Containers : { Iterators : [Algorithms] } }

    [ Algorithms ]  
  [   Iterators     ]
[     Containers      ]
```

```c++
// Online C++ compiler to run C++ program online
// #include "Vector.h"
#include <vector>
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

const int  NUM_INTS = 100;

int main() {
    // Vector<int> myVector;
    vector<int> myVector;
    for (int i = 0; i < NUM_INTS; i++)
        // myVector.add(i);
        myVector.push_back(i);

    for (int i = 0; i < myVector.size(); i++)
        cout << myVector[i] << endl;

    return 0;
}

```
## STL Map

- Associative container like the CS106 Map.
- Allows any object type as a key.
	- e.g. `map<int, string>` maps `int`s to `string`s.
- Powerful but clunky interface

...

(Annotations from the speech, summary)

Iterators are designed to look like pointers. So if you want to iterate over a range, you have to have two different iterators. You have to say start here, stop there, keep walking forward until you get there.

The other thing you need to know about the iterators is that they're read/write. So you can actually crawl over a container and update the values with an iterator, something that you cannot do with our libraries.

It's a bit more work. The syntax basically looks like pointer reading and writing, but the result is that they're much more powerful, and they're a lot more flexible. Here's a quick example. I just wrote some code here that uses a vector iterator. The thing to take a look at is this right here.

```c++
// Online C++ compiler to run C++ program online
// #include "Vector.h"
#include <vector>
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

const int  NUM_INTS = 100;

int main() {
    // Vector<int> myVector;
    vector<int> myVector;
    for (int i = 0; i < NUM_INTS; i++)
        // myVector.add(i);
        myVector.push_back(i);

    for (vector<int>::iterator itr = myVector.begin();
					itr != myVector.end(); ++itr)
					*itr += 137;

    return 0;
}
```

## STL Algorithms

- Generic functions that work on iterator ranges.
- Examples
	- `binary_search`
	- `transform`
	- `next_permutation`
	- `for_each`
	- `sort`
- Almost 75 algorithms

### Personal Conclusion

It is basically a template feature for libraries. In this lecture we see `vector` library and it's template, it has `.begin()` and `.end()` methods (let's say methods in the manner of expl.) are members of its template. So libraries has template libraries for theirselves of the methods being used most of the time, basically.


### Personal Research

**Containers Library** [^1]

> The Containers library is a generic collection of class templates and algorithms that allow programmers to easily implement common data structures like queues, lists and stacks. There are two(until C++11)three(since C++11) classes of containers:
> - sequence containers,
> - associative containers, and
> - unordered associative containers, (since C++11)
> each of which is designed to support a different set of operations.

**Iterator Library** [^2]

> Iterators are a generalization of pointers that allow a C++ program to work with different data structures (for example, containers and ranges(since C++20)) in a uniform manner. The iterator library provides definitions for iterators, as well as iterator traits, adaptors, and utility functions.

**Algorithm library** [^3]

> The algorithms library defines functions for a variety of purposes (e.g. searching, sorting, counting, manipulating) that operate on ranges of elements. Note that a range is defined as [first, last) where last refers to the element past the last element to inspect or modify.

[^1]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container
[^2]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/iterator
[^3]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm

#### Are there STL for other Langauges like Rust or Java?

No, STL specific concept of C++. But they have similar features. Rust has standard library which is NOT called STL, that includes a collection of modules providing common functionality: `std::collections`. And Java has Java Standard Library "package" that provides collections like `ArrayList`, `LinkedList`, `HashMap`. 
