# Memory Allocation in C++ Page

###### CS201: Elementary Data Structures

###### Unit 1: Abstract Data Types and Arrays in C++

Arrays can be implemented so that they do not occupy contiguous memory. The addressing is the same. For instance, `A[r][c]` still addresses the c'th column of the `r`th row of array `A`. However, as we will see later in the course, one can not use the address of `A[0][0]` as the starting point for calculating the address of `A[r][c]`. The reason we use this type of array allocation is to delay allocating memory until it is needed. We can also easily get rid of array rows that contain data no longer needed. This is not possible with arrays allocated using native declaration syntax `<type> A[numRow][numCol]` since that approach allocates an entire block of memory for the array at one time. Read the linked page. Pay special attention to the "Matrix" section. You will notice that individual rows do occupy contiguous memory, but the array itself does not.

### Pointers

```cpp
int natom;
great_function(&natom);
```

Note carefully the difference between `natom` and `&natom`: the former refers to the *value* of the variable natom; the latter refers to the *memory address* of the value of the variable natom. (An explanation of the need to pass a pointer in this case can be found in the section on scope.)

If we needed to *store* this address for later use, we could declare a variable of type "pointer-to-int":

```cpp
 int *natom_address; 
 natom_address = &natom;
```

Notice the use of the "*" syntax to identify the pointer variable. This 
syntax can be used with any data type, int, double, char, etc. (even 
"void").

What if we know the pointer 
(address), and we'd like to know the value stored there? We can access 
that using the "indirection" (dereference) operator:

```cpp
cout << "Number of atoms: " << *natom_address << endl;
```

(If you instead tried to print natom_address instead of 
*natom_address, above, you would most likely get a strange-looking 
integer value, i.e. the hexadecimal representation of the actual memory 
address.)

The notion of a pointer also means
 that we can indirectly change the value of natom using its address. For
 example, the following code will print the number 10, not 7:

```cpp
natom = 7;
natom_address = &natom;
*natom_address = 10;
cout << "Number of atoms: " << natom << endl;
```

tbc...
